---
title: AP1400-2 Amirkabir University of Technology
date: 2024-09-23 09:13:12
tags: C++
categories: Computer Science
---
# Linear Algebra Library

In this homework we are going to implement a **Linear Algebra** library for c++. 
In this library we are going to implement different functions to allow our users to easilly work and manipulate different **matrices**.
We will be implementing all our functions in `hw1.cpp` and `hw1.h`. remember you should put all declarations in the `.h` and all the implementations in the `.cpp` file.
In order to have a matrix in c++ we need a 2D vector.  We use the following line in order to reduce our syntax. 
```cpp
using Matrix = std::vector<std::vector<double>>;
```
From now on we can use the keyword **Matrix** instead of defining the 2D vector everytime.
So, go ahead and put the above line in your code.

**note.** Define all your functions in a namespace called `algebra`.

[CLICK TO REPO](https://github.com/Si1w/LinearAlgebraLibrary)

<!--more-->

# Cryptocurrency

In this homework we are going to implement a simple program to simulate what is happening in **cryptocurrencies**. 
In this homework we are going to implement 2 classes one of them is called `Server` and the other one is the `Client`. Unlike famous cryptocurrencies we are going to use a centralized server to keep track of our clients and transactions, the clients on the other hand can use the server to transfer money to each other and most importantly mine transactions to receive rewards.
Remember for this homework you will need to understand the concepts of *hashing* and *digital signatures*, for this you can use the functions provided in `crypto.cpp/h`file.

**note.** You are only allowed  to alter `server.cpp/h` ,  `client.cpp/h`, and only the debug section of `main.cpp`. 

[CLICK TO REPO](https://github.com/Si1w/Cryptocurrency)

# Binary Search Tree

In this homework we are going to implement a *Binary Search Tree (BST)*. A *binary tree* is a tree graph in which nodes can only have upto 2 children. A *Binary Search Tree* is a binary tree in which the right child of each node have a greater value than the left one.
We are going to implement 2 classes one of them is called `Node` which represents each node in the graph, and the other one is `BST` which is responsible to conncet nodes in a  way to construct a binary search tree. Since the `Node` class is a direct property of the `BST` class; It should be defined inside the BST class.

**note.** You are only allowed  to alter `bst.cpp/h` and only the debug section of `main.cpp`. 

[CLICK TO REPO](https://github.com/Si1w/BinarySearchTree)

# Smart Pointer

In this homework we are going to implement our own smart pointers. Specifically we want to implement our custom `SharedPtr` and `UniquePtr` classes with almost all functionality of std::shared_ptr and std::unique_ptr.

We want to implement 2 class templates called `UniquePtr` and `SharedPtr` with the functions described in the following sections.

**note.** You are only allowed  to alter `unique_ptr.hpp/h`, `shared_ptr.hpp/h` and only the debug section of `main.cpp`. 

[CLICK TO REPO](https://github.com/Si1w/SmartPointer)

# Coffee

In this homework, we are going to tackle inheritance and polymorphism in C++. We are going to make different kinds of espresso-based coffees using their ingredients. As you know all espresso-based coffees (like Cappuccino, Mocha, Latte, and ...) have espresso in their recipe and their difference happens in other ingredients like Milk, Milk Foam, Water, Chocolate ...

We will implement a base class called `Ingredients` and derive all our necessary ingredients from it.
We also implement another class called `EspressoBased` and derive our espresso-based coffees from it.

[CLICK TO REPO](https://github.com/Si1w/Coffee)